Aleo Programs Deployment Blog Post (#5)
Entropy1729/blog: posts/aleo-programs-deployment.md

# Deploying Aleo Programs in Testnet3

This guide is a walkthrough on how to deploy Aleo programs in Testnet3 using the Aleo SDK.

Before you can start deploying Aleo programs you must have the Aleo SDK installed and must have an Aleo Program created.

You can follow the steps detailed in [our previous post](https://www.entropy1729.com/aleo-development-starter-pack/).

## Deploying our Aleo project

To deploy a program we first need to have a program to deploy:

```bash
aleo new foo
```

After creating your program, you can deploy it with:

```bash
cd foo

aleo deploy
```

When you have done this you should see the following output:

```bash
⏳ Deploying 'foo.aleo'...

 • Loaded universal setup (in 2174 ms)
 • Built 'hello' (in 12970 ms)
 • Certified 'hello': 657 ms

✅ Deployed 'foo.aleo' (in "[...]/foo")
```

If you run `aleo deploy` outside your program directory (let's say inside `/not_foo`) the latter is not going to be deployed and the console output should log:

```bash
⚠️  Missing 'program.json' at '[...]/not_foo'
```

And that is how you deploy an Aleo project. Easy right? That's the idea 😉.

## Working with Aleo Programs in Testnet3

> For the initial Testnet3 rollout the deploy command will send deploys through the Aleo Explorer and the fees will be covered by the aleo node.
> This will help to get useful metrics and speed up the development of this testnet!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the initial Testnet3 rollout the deploy command will send deploys through the Aleo Explorer and the deployment fees will be covered by the aleo node. This will help to get useful metrics and speed up the development of Aleo's testnet!
```

> In following posts, we will show you how to execute your deployed Aleo programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following posts, we will show you how to execute your deployed Aleo programs.
```

# Deploying Aleo Programs in Testnet3

> Aleo empowers you to write and build private applications easily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> As you read in the title, this guide is a walkthrough on how to deploy Aleo programs in Testnet3, this will be achieved using the Aleo SDK. We hope this blog post will help you to achieve this and discover all the potential of private applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide is a walkthrough on how to deploy Aleo programs in Testnet3 using the Aleo SDK. 
```

Reviewer 2: "Aleo SDK" should be a link.

> As you read in the title, this guide is a walkthrough on how to deploy Aleo programs in Testnet3, this will be achieved using the Aleo SDK. We hope this blog post will help you to achieve this and discover all the potential of private applications.

Reviewer 3: "... which will be achieved..."

> Before you can start deploying Aleo programs you must have the Aleo SDK installed and must have an Aleo Program created.

Reviewer 2: the rust and aleo install can be assumed, but you probably want to include the command to get your program created here.

You can follow the steps detailed in [our previous post](https://www.entropy1729.com/aleo-development-starter-pack/).

## Deploying our Aleo project

> As said above, before deploying a program you must have a program to deploy. After creating your program, deploying it is very straightforward, just do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creating your program, you can deploy it with:
```

```bash

> cd foo

Reviewer: Should explain that `foo` is the directory of a program that was previously created.

Reviewer 2: yeah you should include the foo creation command earlier

aleo deploy
```

When you have done this you should see the following output:

```bash
⏳ Deploying 'foo.aleo'...

 • Loaded universal setup (in 2174 ms)
 • Built 'hello' (in 12970 ms)
 • Certified 'hello': 657 ms

✅ Deployed 'foo.aleo' (in "[...]/foo")
```

> If you run `aleo deploy` outside your program directory (lets say inside `/not_foo`) the latter is not going to be deployed and the console output should log:

Reviewer 3: let's

```bash
⚠️  Missing 'program.json' at '[...]/not_foo'
```

And that is how you deploy an Aleo project. Easy right? That's the idea 😉.

<!--

> ## Checking your program was succesfully deployed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Checking your program was successfully deployed
```

Author: This isn't in the file now.

> TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TODO
```
This doesn't look right

Author: This isn't in the file now.

-->

## Working with Aleo Programs in Testnet3

> During Testnet3's life cycle all program deployments will be sent to the blockchain by Aleo Explorer on behalf of the user so no user credit spent is needed!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During Testnet3's life cycle all program deployments will be sent to the blockchain by Aleo Explorer on behalf of the user so no user credit expenditure is needed!
```

> During Testnet3's life cycle all program deployments will be sent to the blockchain by Aleo Explorer on behalf of the user so no user credit spent is needed!

Reviewer 2: this is probably confusing without a lot of context, are we sure we want to say this to the general public?

> This will help speed up the development and get helpful metrics for this testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will help to get useful metrics and speed up the development of this testnet! 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: we need a better conclusion
